So a useful task that you'll have to perform whenever you are working with sensors,
especially if you're evaluating multiple sensors is to compute the SNR of your signal.
The SNR is the signal-to-noise ratio,
and it's a measure of how clean or noisy your signal is.
High SNR means the signal has low noise,
low SNR means it has a lot of noise.
But often times when you're calculating the SNR,
you don't know enough about the signal to really know what your signal should be.
In cases like this, you have to approximate SNR.
We'll go through that exercise now by using
a reference pulse rate to tell us where we think the signal power should be concentrated.
In the PPG signal,
we want most of our energy to be around
the pulse rate frequency or say a harmonic of it. So let's get started.
We will first load our three different signals, say 0,
1 and 2, along with their reference heart rate in beats per minutes.
The sampling rate is a 125.
So the first thing we want to do is just plot our signals.
We can see that 60 has really nice PPG peaks.
We can take the Fourier transform and when we plot the Fourier transform,
we see two spikes.
Presumably the first spike is the heart rate somewhere slightly less than 2 hertz,
and then the next one is the first harmonic of the pulse rate.
If we look at the reference pulse rate,
we do see that it's at 1.8 hertz,
which lines up nicely where this spike is.
So we're going to calculate the SNR for our signals
by following the process outlined here.
First, we'll compute the FFT of our signal,
and then we'll calculate the signal power by summing
the FFT magnitudes in some window of say,
five beats per minute around the frequency of our average heart rate.
We'll also include in the signal power
the sum of the frequencies around the first harmonic as well.
Then we calculate the noise power by summing the FFT magnitudes everywhere else.
The SNR is then just the ratio of these two values.
So I purposely didn't give you a whole lot of code here in the starter code,
because I want you to get into the habit of being able to take these concepts,
and then translating them into code.
So we'll do that now. The first-level I got
you is that I gave you the heart rate in beats per minutes.
But to do all this, we need to convert it into hertz first, so we'll divide it by 60.
Then we will calculate the frequency of
the first harmonic by multiplying our fundamental frequency by two.
Will compute the Fourier transform of our signal,
just how we always do.
We'll take the absolute value of our Fourier coefficients to get the magnitude.
Then we want to find the frequencies that are around the heart rates and the harmonic.
So we were told to use a window of five beats per minutes.
Again, we need to convert this into hertz.
Then our window of frequencies that are part of the fundamental frequency is
just the frequencies in this five beats per minute window around our heart rate.
We can do the same thing to compute the harmonic frequency window,
and then we calculate the noise power by summing
the FFT magnitude values from
the fundamental frequency window and the harmonic frequency window.
The noise power is the sum of the frequencies everywhere else.
So then we return our SNR by returning
the ratio between the signal power and the noise power.
Now let's calculate the SNR on the signals we were given.
The first signal has an SNR of 0.2,
the next signal has an SNR of 0.1,
and our last signal has an SNR of almost zero, around 0.05.
So let's plot all three of our signals,
and see how the SNR matches up with them visually.
So the first signal that has the SNR of 0.2 has the largest PPG peaks,
and then our orange signal has smaller PPG peaks and a slightly smaller SNR.
The green signal with no visible PPG peaks has an SNR of almost zero.
So here, we were able to approximate the SNR without
a whole lot of information about what our signal was supposed to look like.
Being able to come up with creative solutions like this when you're in a situation
without much information is
an important skill to have when working with real-world signals.